Added notes from latest sessions. (#146)
kinbiko/mentoring: students/jstonham/README.md

- Redis - stored in RAM so does not require indices as it's already very performant.
- ElasticSearch - useful for searching. As programmers generally use it to speed up searching, they tend to only store the search-related data here.

## Important Tools for Creating Websites

### React

React is a JavaScript library or framework for building user interfaces.
It takes the backend state and turns it into a frontend view.
The framework takes care of the boilerplate so React allows programmers to simplify tasks that would otherwise be difficult.
(In a similar way, JUnit is a Java framework for simplifying the writing of tests).

There is some debate regarding whether React should be thought of as a framework or a library.
Due to React's popularity, many tools have been built around it, e.g. JSX (JavaScript Extended).
React, in combination with these tools, is generally thought of as a framework.

> React is a powerful tool that allows classes, inheritance, nested components etc.

Reviewer: I'm guessing your notes for this week will word slightly clearer so I vote we delete

```suggestion
```

> React also allows JavaScript, HTML and CSS to be combined together in website components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React also allows JavaScript, HTML and CSS to be combined together in JavaScript classes.
```

### Gatsby

> Gatsby JavaScript Framework is a tool that builds websites using only static files, which increases the speed the user can navigate through the resulting interface. It is good for front-end development.

Reviewer: It's not just good for frontend, it cannot be used for anything else.

```suggestion
Gatsby JavaScript frontend Framework is a tool that builds websites using only static files, which increases the speed the user can navigate through the resulting interface.
```

> Gatsby is designed to run in a web browser.

Reviewer: That's basically the definition of front end, so let's simplify
```suggestion
```

It is a combination of React and other libraries, with the `gatsby-cli` (command line tool) in `Node.js`.

### Node

> Node.js provides the ability for programmers to write web servers using JavaScript.

Reviewer: We should distinguish here between "writing applications that are web servers" (although Node has support for this), and writing code that can be run on a server platform (basically in a shell). It's the latter that Node permits. This might seem odd, as basically any of the popular programming languages you know about supports and might even require this platform. E.g.:

- Java
- C
- C#
- C++
- Go
- Ruby
- Python

All of these were written so that, if you knew the right incantation, you could run it in a terminal.

**JavaScript** on the other hand was written to run in the browser. It's only with the advent of Node.js that we can also run it outside the browser (and in particular in a shell).

```suggestion
Node.js provides the ability for programmers to write JavaScript on servers.
```

Programmers need Node.js or similar in order to use JavaScript outside of a browser.

#### Node Package Manager (NPM)

Node Package Manager (NPM) is a command line interface for managing node modules (a way of getting node applications such as VS Code and Atom).

Useful NPM Commands:

`npm run build`\
`npm run develop`\
`npm run format`\
`npm run serve`\
`npm start`\
`npm test`

The last two commands have been given special meaning whereby the user does not need to `run` the command.

> It's good practice to do `npm run format` before asking for a review of, or publishing, your content.

Reviewer: Note that this is specific to Gatsby, and won't work on node projects unless they've defined the 'format' script in their `package.json` file. Take a look in your blog's `package.json` and you'll see what I mean.

When sent from the client, methods such as `POST`, `PUT` and `PATCH` always consist of a header and a body (as the client needs to send the web server the data it wants to add or update).

> [Request for Comments](https://www.ietf.org/standards/rfcs/) specifies that the `GET` method should not have a body when sent from the client.

Reviewer: I was betting on this being true during our session. However [the truth seems to be a bit more convoluted](https://stackoverflow.com/a/983458) Maybe reword this sentence to link to this stackoverflow answer instead

```suggestion
The HTTP [Request for Comments](https://www.ietf.org/standards/rfcs/) [vaguely specifies](https://stackoverflow.com/a/983458) that the a body in a `GET` request should not alter the behaviour of the server in any way .
```

Bandwidth
- Bandwidth measures volume of data in bits per second.

## OSI Model

The International Standards Organisation (ISO) developed the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model.
The OSI model is framework that defines how communication systems should operate regardless of their underlying structure.
The model divides data communication into seven layers that group protocols by their functionality, which ensures that all systems communicate data in a similar way.

The seven layers of the [OSI Model](https://www.webopedia.com/quick_ref/OSI_Layers.asp) are:

1. Physical
1. Data Link
1. Network
1. Transport
1. Session
1. Presentation
1. Application

However, the layers are normally shown in the reverse order as sending data starts with an application and moves down through the layers, with no-longer-needed data being stripped away until the physical transport layer.
From this, layers are then added back on until the application layer, at which point the data has made it to the receiver.

| OSI Layer | Examples |
| --------- | -------- |
| 1. Physical | Ethernet |

> | 2. Data Link | PPP |

Reviewer: Could you add a link to where you got these examples from?

| 3. Network | IP |
| 4. Transport | TCP |
| 5. Session | SQL |
| 6. Presentation | GIF, JPEG |
| 7. Application | WWW browsers, HTTP |

The OSI Model is the basic standard for data communication, but some layers can be grouped together and data can be sent and received without needing all of the layers.

## More on Protocols

- The Internet Protocol tells two computers how to find each other.
- Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) allows the computers to have a connection.
- HTTP defines the `request-response` paradigm.
- Git is a protocol that can be used on top of HTTP.
- Postman is an HTTP client.
- A web server is something that responds to requests.
- A mail server responds to email requests.

## Compilers and Transpilers

> Compilers are programs that take source code written in one language and produce an executable output file in another language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compilers are programs that take source code written in one language and produce an executable output file in machine code (usually, Java is a notable exception).
```

Transpilers take a source code file and convert it to a source code file in another language or a different version of the same language.

> The output will not be executable until it goes through a compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output will not be executable until it goes through a compiler or interpreter.
```

Transpilers are also called source-to-source compilers.

## Model-View-Controller (MVC) Framework

The MVC framework is an architectural design used for developing user interfaces where the application is divided into three interconnected parts.

Model - Data stored in a database.

View - Data shown to the user.

Controller - Business logic.

In MVC frameworks, the model and view are decoupled.
This means they don't interact with each other and can therefore be updated independently of each other.

> Examples of MVC frameworks are Rails (written in Ruby) and Sails.js (written in Node.js).

Reviewer: I took the liberty of using a more known framework (I've never even heard of sails).

```suggestion
Examples of MVC frameworks are Rails (written in Ruby) and Spring MVC (written in Java).
```
